Few cities in Europe feel as unified as Bath,
with all those sweeping curves organizing the
entire city, but this harmony was not accidental.
In the early eighteenth century, Bath was no more
than a small country market town in the southwest
of England. Within a few decades, however, it
became one of the most popular, elegant, and
beautiful cities in Europe thanks to a series of
transformations made by an architect and his son.
But long before its modern popularity
and architectural flourish, the history
of Bath goes back to antiquity,
when it began as a Roman spa town,
renowned among ancient travelers who journeyed to
bathe in the sacred springs of a local goddess.
After the Roman conquest of Britain, the
island became the province of Britannia,
with important cities like Eboracum (York) and
Londinium (London). Bath quickly emerged as an
important tourist destination for the
Romans, who named it Aquae Sulis, which
is Latin for “the waters of Sulis”, the
Celtic goddess that was worshiped there.
The Romans built an elaborate bath
complex around the hot springs,
and for a few centuries, the city thrived
as a center of ritual, health, and leisure.
The remains of this Roman complex can still
be seen today, located in the center of the
city. There you can see the steaming waters
rising from the earth, surrounded by the
stone architecture and engineering that once made
Aquae Sulis a destination of the ancient world.
After the fall of the Roman Empire, Bath
began to decline and was destroyed by
barbaric tribes. The Roman street pattern and
buildings were lost. During the Middle Ages,
the city re-emerged as a religious town,
developing a nucleus of narrow streets and it
became a flourishing center of cloth production.
Today, two main features of medieval Bath remain:
its dense network of narrow, organic streets,
and its Abbey, the architectural
crown of the medieval nucleus.
Bath Abbey seems quite different from
other Gothic churches in England,
and that’s because it’s the last major church
built in medieval Catholic England. By the
time this abbey was being built in the
1500s, other European countries such as
Italy and Spain were in the midst of the High
Renaissance. Bath Abbey belongs entirely to
the final phase of English Gothic architecture,
known as the Perpendicular style. It features
perpendicular tracery in its windows and one of
the finest examples of fan vaulting in England.
The nave is extraordinary—it features one of the
most dematerialized vaults in a Gothic structure.
The piers dissolve into delicate
ribs that spread across the vault,
allowing thinner buttresses and larger
windows that flood the interior with light.
Its front facade is very unique too. On
either side carved ladders rise upward
with angels climbing up and down. This is a
representation of a passage from the Bible,
where Jacob has a dream about a ladder that
leads to heaven. And it’s intended to give
the church a meaning of connection between
heaven and earth, and a path to salvation.
It’s a beautiful representation of the Catholic
theology that still defined England at the time.
Details such as pierced parapets and thin
pinnacles enhance the sense of verticality and
lightness in the structure, making Bath Abbey one
of the most delicate Gothic structures in England.
The city’s commercial strength
gradually declined and by the
end of the seventeenth century Bath
was no more than a quiet market town.
In the late 1600s, renewed claims
about the healing powers of its
hot springs began to circulate.
When Queen Anne visited in 1702,
the city’s reputation was restored
almost overnight. Aristocrats,
politicians, and members of the English
elite flocked there to bathe and socialize.
Money began to flow in, and Bath started
to grow and expand over the region. It
was at this moment that an ambitious architect
named John Wood, the Elder saw an opportunity.
Inspired by the new urban squares being built in
France—particularly the Place Vendôme in Paris,
where multiple houses formed a single
architectural ensemble—John Wood,
the Elder planned Queen Square, northwest of
Bath’s medieval nucleus. In order to achieve
that unified composition that characterized
French squares, he designed Queen Square to
resemble the forecourt of a palace, dominated
by a projecting pediment and columns on the
northern elevation. Although the facade
is composed of seven separate houses,
it is arranged in perfect symmetry, creating
the illusion of a single aristocratic residence.
The houses in the side elevation step down
in accordance with the sloping ground,
yet maintain identical facades to preserve unity.
The southern elevation has a sober
facade that echoes the grandeur of
the northern facade without competing with it.
Wood designed only the exterior elevations,
allowing each owner to hire their own interior
architect, as long as the facade adhered to
his master plan. With this project, John Wood
the Elder introduced a modern sense of scale and
order to the irregular medieval fabric of Bath.
A few years later, John Wood the Elder planned
King’s Circus, a major circular plaza enclosed
by thirty-three houses. He connected the
Circus to Queen Square through Gay Street,
where he continued the same rhythm of houses with
stepped down facades along the sloping ground.
For the Circus, he used the same strategy as
before—designing the entire elevation as a
single unified composition that defines a decorous
urban edge, and letting each client hire their own
architect to design the back. The circular
facade is divided into three equal segments,
allowing three primary streets to
radiate outward from the plaza.
Each house consists of three principal floors
with an underground basement and an attic on
top. Small yards are sunk into the ground
in front of the facades allowing daylight
into the basement level and providing the
houses with discrete service entrances.
At the time, 18th century archaeology
was on the verge of rising,
and rediscovering ruins of antiquity such
as the ruins of Rome, Pompeii, Greece,
or Egypt. John Wood had previously
measured and surveyed Stonehenge,
and he became obsessed with the ancient pre-Roman
cultures that inhabited the area. So he applied
the geometry of Stonehenge in his design for the
circus. In Stonehenge there is an outer elevated
ring surrounded by a ditch, and an inner ring
formed by the stones proper. The diameter of
the space of the circus closely corresponds
with the diameter of Stonehenge’s outer ring,
and a ring of trees planted at the
center echoes the prehistoric stones.
References not just to the
ancient civilizations of Britain,
but also to the Roman past of Bath are
evident in Wood’s project. The facade
is organized in three horizontal registers
articulated by paired columns, each level
employing a different classical order—Doric
at the base, Ionic above, and Corinthian at
the top—creating a vertical progression
similar to that of the Colosseum in Rome.
Like many architects of the time,
Wood was associated with Freemasonry,
and he carved masonic symbols into the
triglyphs of the lower entablature,
including allegories of knowledge
such as a compass drawing a circle,
a telescope, a canvas, as well as references
to Classical Rome and ancient civilizations.
John Wood the Elder died while overseeing
the construction of the Circus. His work
was continued by his son, John Wood, the Younger,
who, at a moment when Bath’s popularity—and demand
for housing—was rapidly increasing, extended the
western axis of the Circus, and connected it to a
new residential complex: the Royal Crescent—a work
of true genius that redefined urban development.
Whereas John Wood, the Elder conceived
urban form through the typical baroque
strategy of linking architectural spaces
with a wide primary street defining the
urban edge and leaving nature out, John
Wood, the Younger tries to engage the
urban edge directly with the natural landscape.
He preserves his father’s innovative concept of
strictly controlling the facade design while
allowing different plans for the interiors.
However, instead of enclosing the space, he
integrated the landscape by forming a half
ellipse with a major axis of 155 meters, built
around a sloping hillside. He secured a legal
covenant ensuring that the open field to the south
would remain permanently unbuilt, perpetually
preserving uninterrupted views of the unspoiled
landscape toward the River Avon in the distance.
So the city no longer turns its back on the
irregular natural condition and the topography,
but completes itself with it, by blurring the edge
between ordered urban form and open landscape.
Because the Crescent was intended to be seen
from a great distance across the open field,
its facade required a more monumental
language. So instead of stacking the
columns using the three classical orders as
in the Circus, Wood used the ground floor of
the houses as a base for a continuous row of
giant Ionic columns that frame each window
of the two upper floors. He also added an
attic floor on the top, setback behind the
cornice line to reduce its visual impact
and preserve the purity of the elevation.
The leveled lawn in front
of the houses is private,
reserved exclusively for the residents,
and it is subtly contained by a concealed
retaining wall known as a ha-ha—an
invisible boundary separating the
private garden from the steep public
field that slopes down towards the river.
The illusion dissolves when viewed from the
rear—you can see how each house differs in plan,
distribution, and size, as it all depended
on how much facade each owner purchased.
The urban expanse of Bath comes to
an abrupt end with the construction
of Marlborough Buildings, which closed the
Royal Crescent to the northwest. From there,
the development continued uphill, forming a
street that would lead towards the later Lansdown
Crescent, a multi-curved development. Designed by
architect John Palmer, Lansdown Crescent extends
the idea not just to make a more complex curve,
but also make it move up a hill and down a valley,
creating a rhythm where space is revealed to
you in a way that as you approach, the volume
becomes the open space. This crescent overlooks
open pastureland grazed by sheep, pairing again
the distinctive Neoclassical architecture
of Bath with the landscape of rural England.
Even though Bath has a medieval
core with a Gothic Abbey,
the architectural character of the city is for
the most part that introduced by John Wood.
Most buildings share the same Neoclassical
features that were popular in England during
the Georgian era. This consistent architectural
language—with shared scale and proportion across
the principal urban spaces—gives the city an
extraordinary sense of unity and cohesion.
Many of these site planning projects were financed
by Ralph Allen, owner of the stone quarries in
the area. Allen saw in Bath an opportunity
to showcase the quality of his limestone,
and supplied the material for the urban projects.
The result is a city built almost entirely from
the same golden limestone—a material continuity
that gives Bath its unmistakable character.
Allen’s ambition extended beyond
the city itself. He commissioned
John Wood the Elder to design Prior Park,
a Neo-Palladian country house overlooking
Bath—further promoting both his stone
and the architectural ideals of the age.
The sequence of majestic urban
spaces created by John Wood,
father and son, influenced countless
cities throughout Britain—from Edinburgh,
where the model of the Circus
was reinterpreted, to London,
where architect John Nash developed picturesque
urban compositions on an even greater scale,
as well as the many terraced houses that adopt
the “identical-facade” concept applied in Bath.
Bath is a city designed as a
composition—where geometry,
landscape, and architecture converge
into a single, unified vision.
Thanks for watching.
I hope you learned.
Please check out my channel as
I have a lot more videos about
European cities explained as well as
extra content for my channel members.
Also like this video to support the channel
and I'll see you very soon in the next episode.
Goodbye!